Call back? Uh, no, yeah, fine, listen, we need to get a voice level on you.
Could you tell us what the weather's like out there? Now is the time for all
good men to come to the aid of the party. The party's sounding fine. Okay,
listen, by the way, you know, this is, uh, we edit this show after we tape it,
so if there's an interruption, that's fine, you know, we can just edit it out.
Okay, look as loud as you can. Okay, can you hear me okay? Yeah. Okay, listen,
first of all, I wanted to know, uh, did you grow up reading science fiction?
Were you a fan? for you? Yeah, I got some old copies of Astounding and FNSF and
Galaxy from a couple of college students who are on my paper route. They gave me
about 900 old magazines, which I still have, so I have Volume One, Number One,
and a lot of different, you know in the first year of FNSF and so forth, so I
started reading in probably in fifth grade, and through high school, I
contributed to fanzines. I even published a few issues of my own fanzine. I went
to, I think, one science fiction convention. Met Tarlen Ellison and Buck and
Juanita Coulson. Yeah, we thought you might have been a fan just from the way
you treated on the air. We weren't sure, though. Uh-huh. Well, let me get right
to the meat of some of the questions we had. I guess the tremendous popularity
of science fiction and fantasy movies during the summer of 82 and last spring
and so forth has been unbelievable in the money they've taken in. Do you think
there's any reason for that popularity? Yeah, I think that one reason is that
science fiction movies are finally getting the special effects that are equal to
their content. When you would read a science fiction book, you would be able to
imagine astonishing things happening, but then when you would go to the movie,
especially let's say in the 1950s, when there was the last big science fiction
boom, you would see some pretty transparently awful special effects in most of
the movies. And there were some good ones, some of George Powell's productions,
for example. But for the most part, the special effects were laughable. And so
the movies were not able to do justice to the ideas and the material. These new
science fiction films, starting with, well, obviously starting with 2001 and
then with Silent Running, which were precursors of the current boom which for a
long time were not followed by any other notable science fiction films, these
new films are able to harness enough technology so that the visuals can do
justice to the ideas.
Okay, fine. Do you think it's possible to have a science fiction movie which is
as great as any other movie, or is it a limited sort of a genre? Certainly. The
British film magazine Side and Centric takes a poll of the world's film critics
every ten years to see what are the greatest films of all time. They've done it
in 52, 62, 72 and they're in the process of doing it again now. And I fully
anticipate that when the tallies are added up 2001 will be included among the
ten greatest films ever made. Okay, good. Do you think E.T. is as good as the
money it's taken in indicates? The money that E.T. has taken in indicates the
nature of the market today. It was a mass market, very popular family
entertainment that came out at summertime with more than 1,000 theaters at some
point playing the film. And so it can generate revenues like that because of the
nature of the market. The movie is very good. And I loved it. And I think it
belongs on the same list, though, not so much with science fiction movies as
with movies like National Velvet, Lassie Come Home, movies about as many other
people have also observed it's kind of a movie about a boy and his dog in a way
it's more that than science fiction I mean technically it's of course it's
science fiction but I think the appeal was not because it was science fiction
the appeal is because of our identification with this little boy and something
that he learns to care for and something that we learned to care for what's
what's Spielberg got that so captured people's imaginations? Spielberg has the
ability to remember what it was like to be a child. When I see his movies, and
I'm also including something, for example, like Raiders of the Lost Ark, I am
taken back to the feeling that I had when I would read pulp science fiction
serials in magazines like Trilling Wonder Stories Startling Stories and so forth
and stuff by Haggard and Burroughs and people like that he remembers that sense
of wonder and is able to communicate it on and he also remembers what it was
like to be a kid I think it's interesting that so many of his films have as
their locale the American suburbs and he grew up in a suburb and you see that
suburb in Poltergeist in particular and in E.T.
What about fantasy as distinguished from science fiction? Have there been any
good fantasy movies? Well, the problem with fantasy is that science fiction is
allegedly plausible, although we could have a lot of questions about how much,
for example, of Star Wars is really plausible. Fantasy is not supposed to be
plausible, but the problem is most fantasy movies seem to be limited to sword
and sorcery, types of Conan the Barbarian, The Sword and the Sorcerer, and
movies like that. Or you get an animated film like Lord of the Rings. I have not
seen very much of the kind of fantasy. for example, The Fantasy and Science
Fiction Magazine helped to popularize. Fantasy in that it has to do with the
whimsy of magic or impossible things intruding into real life. Those kinds of
movies are hard to do and it takes a lot of nerve to do them. It's one thing to
have some broad falling out of her leopard skin bikini and some big brute with a
sword, you know, and the rippling pectorals and so forth, but it's another thing
to have the imagination to really create a fantasy. We understand there are two
big fantasy movies coming out at Christmas, Dark Crystal and Something Wicked
This Way Comes. Have you by any chance seen anything from those? I haven't seen
anything from either one of them except for some press material. Okay, just a
couple more here. We thought that Blade Runner didn't go over as well as it
could have. Do you think there's any reason for that? Yeah, I think the reason
for that is that the director never really got interested in the people or
androids and his plot. And the movie was a triumph of set design. It looked
great. It was a very interesting-looking vision of the future, and in particular
the notion that in so many movies or books, at least in you know we're not
talking about maybe people who are really familiar with the whole field of
science fiction but to the general public the science fiction future is this
wonderful stainless steel and formica place with towers and rockets jetting
around and everybody dressed like a hospital intern and so forth and this movie
had the imagination to suggest that 40 years from now things are going to be 40
years older the pollution is going to be 40 years uh worse Poverty is going to
be 40 years more deeply ingrained. Crime will be 40 years more ubiquitous and so
forth. That was a very interesting vision. I do feel, though, that the really
interesting thing about Blade Runner and probably about the Philip K. Dick
material that it started from was centered around the question of what is human,
you know. If the memories that I have are not of a life that I live, does that
make them any less my memories? stories. And Harrison Ford, when I interviewed
him, said much the same thing, that that's what attracted him to the material.
The dilemma of which of these people were human and which of these people were
not, is as far as their minds were concerned, they all had the same kind of
background to call on. I think that that theme kind of got lost in the middle of
those great special effects. And if the movie had really been willing to follow
through on the value questions that it raised, it might have been a more
interesting movie. Now, the irony is that I think that one of the reasons it
wasn't as successful as it might have been is because it didn't follow through
on those questions. And yet, from what I understand, that material was cut out
of the movie because they figured it wouldn't be box office. It's better just to
have the special effects. Yeah, that's very good. Excellent. Listen, what about
the future of science fiction in the movies? Back in the 50s, there was a big
science fiction boom that was reflected in the cinema, and of course the last
couple of years there's been a tremendous boom. Do you think it's peaked out and
it's going to go down, or is there a great future for science fiction movies?
This is a different kind of boom than the 50s boom. For the most part, with the
exception of movies like Fantastic Planet and Destination Moon, the 50s science
fiction boom was a B-movie boom. Most of those pictures were made for double
features or for drive-ins. A lot of them were made by American International. on
a very low budget. They were exploitation pictures. The movies that are being
made today are among the all-time top-grossing films ever made, indicating a
really deep-seated desire on the part of the audience to go see them. Another
difference is that in the 50s, to a degree, even though television was around in
the 50s, to a degree, the American people were still going to movies out of
habits that they brought over from the pre-television era. Today, the Basie
moviegoer is 19 years old, and more than half of all moviegoers are under the
age of 25. So you have different demographics in the audience, and these younger
people have traditionally been more interested in science fiction. So that I
think that the big-budget science fiction blockbuster is going to continue to be
a phenomenon indefinitely. Now, the question is, what about the little pictures
that use a certain amount of imagination? What about a picture like L.Q. Jones'
A Boy and His Dog? What about a film like the
Harvey Keitel picture, where the man has the television cameras implanted in his
eyes and he follows around the woman who thinks she's dying of an incurable
disease? Bertrand Tavernier directed it. Can you remember the name? No, I can't.
Well, oh, I think it's Death Watch. Death Watch. That's a wonderful science
fiction film based basically on an idea. In other words, there are no special
effects in it except the idea that the guy has television eyes, which you can't
see, of course. Oh, you get some point-of-view shots showing what he sees as
kind of like a grid or something. That was a great idea for a movie. I wonder
what the future of those films will be Since the big hardware pictures and the
mass market pictures seem to be really well established, I think you might agree
with me though that some of the best science fiction material is more suited to
a smaller form. For example, I would love to see a film based on The People by
Zena Henderson. Why whom? Zena Henderson. Oh yeah, The People Stories. Yeah.
Yeah, they tried that on television about four or five years ago if I remember
correctly. Oh, really? Yeah. Why didn't he watch television?
William Shatner and Kim Darby. And they took a hodgepodge of about four or five
of their stories and put them together. Were they any good? Sort of. I didn't. I
missed that. I go to the movies so much that I hardly ever, you know, I'm never
at home during prime time. I'm always out in a movie theater. I was going to ask
you, you're right in the, sometimes they can't show the intimate little things
on, in science fiction except on television like The Electric Grandmother which
was just on PBS. Do you think that maybe the small film just can't make it
because they
stay so much in the shadow of the big science fiction films?
Well, I think that the problem that Hollywood has always had with any small
offbeat picture is they can't figure out how they're going to sell it. Now, one
thing we have to remember is that the two Spielberg hits this summer were
inexpensive pictures. Poltergeist and E.T. were both brought in for not much
more than $10 million. And, you know, today the average Hollywood production,
the average movie costs between $7 and $8 million. So the $10 million is not
much to spend on a movie. It seems like a lot, of course, but a $10 million
picture today, in many cases, could have been made for $1 or $2 million 10 years
ago. So, in a way, Spielberg, with those two pictures, has not spent tons of
money. The Boy and His Dog does have a life, though, is sort of an underground
midnight movie. Yeah, that's where all those movies turn up. Another one of my
favorites is Zardoz. And that plays in the revival theaters, but it never found
an audience the first time around. Okay, I've just got about two more. Do you
think that the public's fascination with science fiction movies is any way
related to, say, the space program, the realization that we've got to clean up
our act or get off the earth, or things of that sort?
No. No, I don't think so. I think maybe some of the fascination with 2001 And
one might have been because it came out at a time when amazing things were
happening in space and we were getting ready to land on the moon and so forth.
But I believe that the space movies today, like Star Wars and The Empire Strikes
Back, are identified with primarily in the same way that Raiders of the Lost Ark
is, as a picaresque adventure. And when we talk about science fiction, I gather
that you and I both kind of tacitly did not include horror films. I think a
psychiatrist might say something like this, or at least I've heard this theory.
It's not so much that the space films indicate our feeling that there's a new
frontier to be conquered, as that the monster films indicate our fear of
technology. And there is an old theory that at any time when mankind in recent
years, in the 20th century, when people, when the public has started to feel
threatened by the bomb or by technology, then you get a lot of horror pictures
because the message seems to be science will get out of control. Science will
kill us. There'll be some kind of a virus or giant grasshoppers or something
will happen. And, you know, scanners or other terrible things will be unleashed
upon the population. Yeah, the science fiction people sort of call that the
Frankenstein Conflicts. I think that's probably right. Yeah, listen, I'll...
I'll tell you one thing that's happening. I'm getting awfully bored by the
special effects makeup. You know, it's only been about 18 months since the big
breakthroughs of, oh, like American Werewolf in London and so forth. And
already, you know, You know, you get to close up to the face and the jaw begins
to pulsate and then the face begins to expand and there's a face inside trying
to get out. I've seen it now, you know? I've seen it so many times that it's
boring. I want to get on with the story. Do you think that might have been the
problem with Carpenter's The Thing? Well, it really had an interesting monster,
but it didn't really have people.
i didn't really feel much concern about the characters in the thing and another
thing that bothered me you know years ago in science fiction fandom they had the
so-called idiot plot the plot that can only last as long as the movie because
everyone in the movie is an idiot because if somebody was an idiot they would
figure out what to do and do it and in the thing the characters have an
annoying, persistent tendency to not do what everyone in the audience knows they
should be doing. You know, they split up. They go outside. They say, you stay
right here because I know I can take care of myself. They trust each other. They
do not keep a census of who was where, when, and why. In a group of people like
that with military discipline, and the moment that they figured out what they
were up against, if they had instilled watertight discipline upon themselves,
they would have been a lot better off. But the movie depends upon everybody
being an idiot. That's very good. You're exactly right. Well, listen, we wanted
to ask you before we let you go, we knew that you were going to be doing a new
show, that PBS one, you were going off of that, but we haven't got any
information about where and when and what. Well, Gene Siskel and I left Sneak
Previews. We started a show called At the Movies. It has a similar structure. We
review new films. Instead of Spot the Wonder Dog, we now have Aroma the Educated
Skunk. And we are on in 86 markets around the country, including most of the top
50 markets. Where are you calling from again? Odessa, Texas. We picked you up on
the PBS channel here from Dallas. Dallas? We're on in Dallas. We are on in
Dallas-Fort Worth on KTXA at Saturday at 3.30 p.m. no we don't get ktx a dog on
it um well maybe one of our stations out here will pick you up yeah but no we
missed it station nearest you uh kmid k what city uh odessa odessa midland kmid
and uh ktpx where's that and koza they're all local oh abc nbc and uh cbs
affiliates here They're all in Odessa. I'm looking at this list here. Well, it's
Odessa and Midland. It could be either one, KTPX, KMID. Corpus Christi. No. Is
Odessa, Lubbock? No. What station in Lubbock? Oh, we haven't sold Lubbock. Oh,
okay. Sorry. Um,
well, I don't know. We're doing very well. We've gotten three times the ratings
that we had before. Well, your other show was excellent quality. We're going to
miss that. Maybe we can start a little letter writing thing out here and see if
we can get a hold of it. Well, it's called At The Movies, and it's put out by
Tribune Productions at WGN in Chicago. Yeah. And we're very happy. I guess it
looks pretty successful from our point of view. Yeah. We're in Waco, Texas.
Waco. What do I know? I'm not from Texas. Most of the people from Waco are Waco,
though. Oh, I believe that. Anyway, it's called At The Movies, and it is on the
air. Okay, and you're going to be staying with the Chicago Sun-Times though
right? Yeah. Yeah okay well listen we appreciate your time we know how valuable
it must be and uh when we get these edited into our shows we'll send you copies
of the cassettes. Thanks a lot. And uh thank you very much Mr. Eber. You bet.
Bye bye. Bye bye.